Governments and Facial Recognition AI: Security Tool or Threat to Privacy?

Introduction:

Facial recognition artificial intelligence can find a person in a matter of seconds by looking at facial features in a photo or video. Governments across the world are now implementing this technology for the police and the safety of the people. While this technology is an excellent way to keep security, many have fears for privacy and personal freedom. Is this putting people to safety or giving governments too much control of its people?

Benefits:

Another motivation for governments to use this technology might be huge time savings. Instead of officers having to look through thousands of pictures to find a suspect, face recognition algorithms will be able to cross-reference a face against a large database within seconds.

Proponents of this have claimed that the technology would benefit us all by increasing the safety of the general population and streamlining investigations. If time is pressing, it can allow law enforcement agencies to act faster than the lag time techniques used in the past.

Concerns and Current Events:

That technology is clearly still very imperfect. Accuracy can be a problem; a lawsuit in Florida recently accused MR7 of wrongly identifying a suspect, and the man who had been arrested happened to be the plaintiff. It is one thing to implant criminals with microchips in the name of victory, quite another to scrutinize individual lives and freedom on the basis of the software.

Another concern is privacy. Based on an investigation, Canadian authorities confirmed that Clearview AI illegally scraped billions of photos from the internet. Critics believe there are a higher risk for this kind of technology to cause mass surveillance and curtail citizen's rights to walk freely in society without being identified.

Ethical and Software Development Perspective

The discussions surrounding software development have also been important from an ethical point of view. Software developers have to consider how their software might be misused, the moral responsibilities of their development, as well as how to correctly develop the software.

According to studies done by NIST, some facial recognition techniques can actually have different performances for different demographics which can make it more likely to have false matches. Due to this, developers and governments need to collaborate to make sure these systems are tested stringently, used appropriately, and monitored.

Conclusion:
Using facial recognition AI can enhance safety and enable the police and other organizations to perform more efficiently. However, it also brings about issues such as privacy concerns, reliability and civil liberties. As more governments start to use it, bringing the right balance between individual rights and state security is likely to be a challenge. Perhaps the way we choose to deploy this technology will be just as important as the capabilities it provides.


Sources:
GOV.UK — Police Use of Facial Recognition
NIST — Face Technology Evaluations (FRTE/FATE)
NIST — Demographic Effects
ACLU — Florida Wrongful Arrest Case
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights Report
European Commission — AI Act
